Virtual Machine Basics (e.g., VirtualBox, UTM, or VMware)
Debian Installation and Configuration
Partitioning (Primary, Logical, and Swap)
User and Group Management
Sudo and Root Privileges
UFW Firewall Setup
SSH Configuration
Password Policy and Security
Cron Jobs
System Monitoring (e.g., hostnamectl, uname, etc.)
Service Management (systemctl)
SELinux or AppArmor Basics
Hostname and Network Configuration
File Permissions and Ownership (chmod, chown)
File System Basics (ext4, mount, fstab)
Package Management (apt)
Basic Shell Commands and Scripting
System Logs and Log Management


30.8G (gigabytes) = 29.80 GiB (gibibytes)
500M (megabytes) = 0.49 GiB (gibibytes)
1K (kilobytes) = 0.00 GiB (gibibytes)
30.36G = 29.34 GiB
10G = 9.54 GiB
2.3G = 2.25 GiB
5G = 4.77 GiB
3G = 2.93 GiB
4G = 3.91 GiB
1024M = 1 GiB
fdisk -l


primary is for boot
logical just for data and other things




path to change the :ssh port /etc/ssh/sshd_config

some comment that i do need for the project
Partitioning and Disk Management
1. lsblk: Lists information about all block devices (e.g., disks and partitions) on your system.
   Example: lsblk  
   Use: To see the current partition structure.

2. fdisk: A partition management tool for creating, deleting, and modifying disk partitions.
   Example: sudo fdisk /dev/sda  
   Use: To create primary, logical, and swap partitions.

3. parted: Another partitioning tool, more advanced than fdisk.
   Example: sudo parted /dev/sda  
   Use: To resize or create partitions.

4. mkfs: Formats a partition with a specific file system.
   Example: mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda1  
   Use: To format partitions with file systems like ext4.

5. mkswap: Sets up a partition as swap space.
   Example: mkswap /dev/sda2  
   Use: To prepare a swap partition.

6. swapon and swapoff: Activates or deactivates swap space.
   Example: swapon /dev/sda2  
   Use: To enable swap during setup or testing.

System Configuration
1. hostnamectl: Configures or views the system’s hostname.
   Example: hostnamectl set-hostname myserver  
   Use: To set the hostname of the server.

2. timedatectl: Configures system time and date settings.
   Example: timedatectl set-timezone Europe/Paris  
   Use: To configure the system’s timezone.

3. ufw: Manages the uncomplicated firewall (if used).
   Example: ufw enable  
   Use: To enable and manage firewall rules.

4. apt or dnf: Package managers for installing and updating software.
   Example: sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade  
   Use: To manage software updates and installations.

5. nano or vim: Text editors for editing configuration files.
   Example: nano /etc/fstab  
   Use: To modify files such as /etc/fstab or /etc/hosts.

User and Permission Management
1. adduser: Adds a new user to the system.
   Example: sudo adduser john  
   Use: To create new users.

2. passwd: Changes a user’s password.
   Example: passwd john  
   Use: To set or update passwords.

3. chmod: Changes file permissions.
   Example: chmod 755 myfile  
   Use: To control who can read, write, or execute files.

4. chown: Changes file ownership.
   Example: chown john:john myfile  
   Use: To assign files to specific users and groups.

5. groups: Shows groups a user belongs to.
   Example: groups john  
   Use: To verify or assign group memberships.

Networking
1. ip: Configures or inspects networking interfaces.
   Example: ip addr show  
   Use: To view IP addresses and configure network interfaces.

2. ping: Tests connectivity to another network device.
   Example: ping google.com  
   Use: To check internet or local network connections.

3. netstat or ss: Displays network statistics or active connections.
   Example: ss -tuln  
   Use: To view ports in use or troubleshoot networking.

4. scp: Securely copies files between systems.
   Example: scp file.txt user@host:/path/to/destination  
   Use: To transfer configuration files.

System Monitoring
1. top: Displays running processes and system performance.
   Use: To monitor CPU and memory usage.

2. htop: A more user-friendly alternative to top.
   Example: htop  
   Use: To monitor and manage system resources interactively.

3. df: Shows disk space usage.
   Example: df -h  
   Use: To ensure partitions are correctly mounted and sized.

4. du: Displays disk usage for files and directories.
   Example: du -sh /var/log  
   Use: To locate large files or directories.

5. journalctl: Displays system logs.
   Example: journalctl -b  
   Use: To debug system issues.

Boot Management
1. grub-install: Installs the GRUB bootloader.
   Example: sudo grub-install /dev/sda  
   Use: To set up the bootloader on your system.

2. update-grub: Updates the GRUB configuration.
   Example: sudo update-grub  
   Use: To refresh bootloader configurations after changes.

3. systemctl: Controls system services and the boot process.
   Example: systemctl enable ssh  
   Use: To enable or disable services like SSH at boot.

File Management
1. mount and umount: Mounts and unmounts file systems.
   Example: mount /dev/sda1 /mnt  
   Use: To test partitions or manage external drives.

2. rsync: Synchronizes files and directories.
   Example: rsync -avh /source /destination  
   Use: To back up important configuration files.
